# ABE Financial Model Overview

The ABE financial model is best understood from the perspectives of the different functional groups that interact with it. These include project contributors, users, investors and analysts.

We first describe the high level mechanics and then describe the model from these different perspectives, and then describe the incentive structures and other properties of the model.

## High level flow

1. A project is undertaken and initial work is done.

2. A fair market price and valuation for the project are agreed upon in a collective and transparent process of appraisal.

3. The project is also collectively appraised ("DIA" - explained below) in terms of sources of value, and proportions of value contributed by each contributor ("attributions") are agreed upon.

4. Users may pay any amount (including zero) for use of the project, i.e. the price is not a factor here.

5. Payments made to the project are immediately distributed to all contributors according to the current attributions.

6. Payments to the project that exceed the agreed-upon price are treated as investments (this is the role played by the price).

7. Investments entitle the payer to shares of revenue generated by the project, i.e. the investors are added to the attributions. The share of attribution is determined by considering the size of the investment in relation to the agreed-upon current valuation.

8. Contributions of any kind (including investments) may change the attributions ("dilution"), valuation and price. Typically, the former two would change constantly (i.e. typically increase) while the price would change infrequently.

9. There are three revenue streams. Two of them, payment for use, and investments, have already been discussed. The third is revenue from attribution. This comes from projects downstream in the ABE ecosystem that include the present project in their attributions (e.g. either using it as capital or exhibiting ideas present in the present project).

## From the Perspective of Users

1. Users of the product or service may pay any amount to use it, including nothing. Thus, unlike the typical sense of the word "price," payment of the agreed-upon price here is not a precondition for use of the product or service. Instead, the price is simply a measure of the value provided by the service and it is used in accounting, as will be explained below.

## From the Perspective of Contributors

1. There are many kinds of contribution that someone might make to the project. Any contribution is understood as either being a labor, capital, or idea contribution. In addition, there are also purely financial contributions, i.e. someone simply paying money to the project. In traditional finance, money is treated as capital, but here we differentiate these since capital contributions in the ABE sense typically serve a bounded and describable (and thus appraisable) purpose within the project, whereas money is generally treated as applying to the whole project. For instance, office space would be treated as capital, and if everyone is working remotely, then it is seen to contribute zero value to the project. On the other hand, money typically cannot be subdivided as being used for specific purposes, as units of money are interchangeable (there is no "this money" and "that money" except if such bounds are artificially set), and for the purposes of ABE accounting, all money paid to projects is essentially treated as going into a common well, with all sources being proportionately recognized. We say that money represents _anonymous_ value, whereas labor, capital, and ideas represent appraisable, non-anonymous value. From the perspective of would-be contributors, financial contributions represent the least risk, as such contributions grow at the rate of the project as a whole. Non-financial contributions are directly appraised in terms of value contributed to the project (as will be explained below), so they may grow at a higher or lower rate.

## From the Perspective of Investors

1. Financial contributions to a project are treated in a two-pronged way in consideration of the magnitude of such contributions relative to the fair market price:

2. If the contribution is less than or equal to the price, then it is treated simply as compensation for use of the project, and nothing further needs to be done.

3. If the contribution exceeds the price, then the excess is treated as an _investment_, entitling the contributor to an attributive share of revenues determined in relation to the present valuation.

4. In many respects, ABE is a combination of the startup investment model (investors gain attributive stake and there is dilution) and the model of trading on public markets (investors immediately receive shares of revenue or dividend). The result is that anyone may participate in investment at any stage of the project (like public markets), and not only those who are wealthy (as is the case for startup investment).

## From the Perspective of Analysts

1. Non-financial contributions to a project are attributed a share of revenues by the process of Dialectical Inheritance Attribution (DIA). DIA is a collective process where groups of people ("analysts") appraise labor, capital, and idea contributions made to the project and agree on the proportionate value of each contribution to the project as a whole. The result of DIA is a set of _attributions_ prescribing the proportions of payments made to the project that are owed to each contributor, determined as the sum of proportions of all contributions made to the project by them. That is, contributors to the project receive shares of revenue of the project commensurate with the value provided by them, as agreed-upon in a collective process that anyone may participate in. The process of DIA is guided by data, standards, conventions, heuristics, precedents, and other guidelines specified in the ABE founding documents that are designed to produce fair and accurate results and also improve the process itself over time. The rationale and conclusions of DIA in relation to a project are publicly recorded and open to revision.

2. Valuation of the project is in principle a function of revenue, for instance, the Net Present Value (NPV) of the aggregate of the three revenue streams over the useful lifetime of the project. In the early stages of ABE, since there is very little or no revenue, and also high uncertainty regarding the potential magnitude of these revenue streams, other data and heuristics are used to estimate valuation, such as estimates of the industry cost of producing the project. The valuation is agreed-upon in a collective and transparent process that anyone may participate in, with the rationale publicly recorded and the conclusions open to revision.

3. The price of the project is in principle most accurately determined as the share of value created using the project, a share that is once again determined through DIA. But as this information is unlikely to be available in practice (e.g. it may be private information, and the technological means to track use are currently unavailable), at least at the early stages of ABE, the price is typically set by proxy analysis, that is, by looking at the prices of similar or analogous projects that have a market price in traditional markets. The price is agreed-upon in a collective and transparent process that anyone may participate in, with the rationale publicly recorded and the conclusions open to revision.

## Accounting

1. Financial contributions to the project are immediately distributed to all project contributors according to the current attributions.

2. In the case of investments, in addition to being paid out according to the a priori attributions, the fresh investment also increases the valuation of the project by the investment amount, and entitles the investor a share of revenues of the new valuation according to the size of their investment in relation to that new valuation. In other words, an investment simultaneously pays out existing contributors, dilutes attributions, and increases valuation. For instance, if a project is worth $100 and there is a $100 investment, then existing contributors get the $100, the new valuation is $200 and the investor now has a 50% attributive share.

3. Fresh non-financial contributions also increase the valuation of the project, but they do so via DIA appraisal of their attributive share. That is, once the value of the contribution is appraised in relation to the whole project, a new valuation is implied by considering the existing valuation and the incoming proportion of value represented by the fresh contribution. Essentially, non-financial contributions increase valuation in an inverse way to how investments do it -- in the case of investments, it is the valuation that is known, and the attribution is determined from it, whereas here it is the other way around.

4. All accounting for a project is public information. Every payment made into and out of a project is publicly declared, even if it is anonymized. Attributions are publicly declared, even if anonymized. Price and valuation are publicly declared as well.

## Incentive Structures

1. There are no constraints on contributors on the use of the money paid to them by the project. Yet, the project generating tangible returns for them is a measure of the confidence of the community in the value of the project. Thus, it is also an inverse measure of the risk level of future contributions to the project. Each payment thus constitutes an incentive for future contribution.

2. As payments made to contributors is public information, such payments equally serve as incentives for future contribution for _all_ people, and not only the contributors being paid this time.

3. In traditional markets there is a dichotomy known as primary vs secondary investments. Primary is where projects sell "ownership" stake in exchange for money that will be used for future contributions. Such future contributions are guided by a bureaucracy that employs people who in many cases are the original creators of the value already generated by the project. The bureaucracy pays such contributors a steady income, representing a low risk environment for such contributors, but also one where they don't directly reap the benefits of valuable contributions (or the cost of non-valuable ones) made by them. The secondary market is where shares of ownership are sold for money. Traders gain or lose in terms of the _valuation_ of the project, while also receiving shares of revenue (dividend). The traders themselves are not involved in the project's value creation, and from the project's perspective, serve the role of determining market price of each share (not of the service provided) and consequently valuation of the project as a whole.

4. In ABE, since project contributors have been paid, they are themselves in a position to spend the money on future initiatives for the project. As they are the ones who have already been publicly and fairly recognized as contributing the most value to the project, they are adjudged to be in the best position to assess future value. This is in contrast to traditional primary market-funded bureaucracies, where there is no such "proof" of the soundness of judgement of value by project management, and it is only an indirect proof since the primary value creators are obscured and are not systemically known as they are in ABE. The effective internal attribution levels within a corporation (e.g. salaries, authority) are not guaranteed to be fair as they are in ABE (via the process of DIA). Thus, this also implies that the incentives to create value are stronger in ABE since there is the promise of full and fair recognition. Low-risk income may still be drawn but by fulfilling well-specified labor items identified by those already accredited by the system, rather than by submitting to a bureaucracy.

5. ABE eliminates the boundary between the free market and corporate bureaucracy. Currently, companies use task management systems where tasks are prioritized and someone is made to work on them. There is limited flexibility on collaboration and efficient use of resources as these are essentially guided by decree (of the management hierarchy) rather than in a fluid market economy where the highest-value items are evident and also entail the highest reward, and where there are strong incentives to collaborate to efficiently leverage resources to do the task quickly. This efficiency, fair recognition, and encouragement of collaboration are features unique to ABE and not present in either corporate bureaucracies or in the capitalist market economy, and additionally, ABE eliminates this boundary by using the same attribution-based market paradigm in all cases, thus significantly minimizing the scope of bureaucratic activity, to a small enough scale where simple human interactions between friends are all that's needed, with formal attribution processes taking over at larger scales.

6. Payments to a project are immediately distributed according to current attributions, as mentioned earlier, but this is only always true for labor contributors. For capital and idea contributors, the money is only paid to them if they have put ABE in place on the concerned projects. This serves two purposes. First, it ensures that the payment made to them is likewise distributed fairly upstream, and secondly, it creates a financial incentive for ABE adoption. If the money isn't immediately payable, then it is redistributed in the present project according to the current attributions, but the owed amount remains unaffected, and represents debt that will be paid upon ABE adoption by the upstream project.

7. Incentives for early-stage investors. For this most part, the incentives here remain to be quantified. There are some promising signs as well as some indicators that things will be quite different under ABE, and that that may be a good thing. On the face of it, if the project is at an early stage of development and it is apparent that there is much value still to be reaped, then there is an incentive for investors to fund the project, since the value of money at an early stage of the project is likely to be higher than its value at a later stage. There is less risk for such investors than in traditional markets, since in ABE the assessment of value is more grounded in empirical data and facts and not contingent on artificial and unnecessary game theoretic uncertainty inherent in competition. For instance, if the project exhibits ideas that are later reflected in other projects, that is simply a fact, and it inherently entails attributive revenue. There is limited subjectivity there, since the process is guaranteed to be fair by the "dialectical mirror" property, that is, that standards used apply to everyone and are typically applied to anonymized data, so analysts can only conduct the process fairly and thus will generally certify facts that appear evident to the investor. Value is not contingent on whether the "company" "wins" or "loses." There is simply the creation and flow of value, and the recognition of it by all. This translates into more tractability of ABE in relation to traditional markets, and consequently less risk. That could mean that investments in general lead to less returns than they might in traditional markets. On the other hand, these lower returns on average are also balanced out by greater tractability of the system, meaning that for those who have deep insights into projects and see how they could be useful, that they may gain significantly by virtue of their insight and in a way that isn't tempered by accidental risk. Those who gain significantly would truly be worthy of higher empowerment on the basis of facilitating the creation of value (which may be treated as "objective" in the context of DIA due to the dialectical mirror property), not speculation regarding _perception_ of value and reactions to perceived value.

8. Paying for use. As users may pay any amount for use of the project (including zero), what incentivizes payment at all? For the most part, this is an open problem. Initially, the incentive will likely come from education, that supporting ABE projects leads to ABE adoption and that means that these users themselves can then launch projects of their own and expect revenue without having to work at traditional companies where they can't do their most valuable work (since the absence of fair recognition processes (such as DIA) within the company creates an incentive to contribute the minimum value that achieves the goals articulated by the bureaucracy). In the longer term, payment from use may be part of a general usage-tracking (and open source, publicly managed) system where opting into this system automatically fulfills payments from revenues generated by use. But such technology is presently out of reach. For now, we need other ways of incentivizing payment for use, perhaps cultural ways like offering codes that allow people to display badges showing their support for ABE projects, similar to the "I voted!" stickers used at US polling booths during elections.

9. Managing risk. The freedom to take chances is necessary to creating the most value. This freedom often comes with risk, since many things judged to be wrong are indeed wrong, but a few things judged to be wrong are often the most valuable things of all. This is a necessary property of the most valuable endeavors, since the right things must appear wrong against a wrong backdrop, otherwise they couldn't be right! So, in the event that a project ends up having negative value, it seems necessary to protect contributors against unbounded negative impact. For this purpose, the system should provide "insurance" of some kind. We could say that contributors (including investors) could always sever their link to a project, and in that case, they no longer receive recognition for that project, whether positive or negative. This could be done in a couple of different ways, e.g. (a) investors are always liable for up to some fraction of total loss (e.g. 1/e), (b) investors are never liable for loss, and instead, the negative appraisal of value of the project simply serves as a precedent that guarantees that similar projects and initiatives in the future are unlikely to be valuable, thus constituting a negative incentive for such activities in the future. The second option seems more daring, but also, may well be sufficient and better and more natural. In either case, the cost of unpaid negative value is borne by the system. But the premise is that this cost leads to greater global value creation.

10. Eliminating liquidity. Especially with option (b) for risk management, there is likely no longer any need to trade away assets to manage risk. The ability to do so would lead to inaccurate assessment of value, and the purpose of the entire system is to determine whom to empower in order to create the most value for all. In the absence of a competitive market, the uncertainty around the assessed value of a project is representative purely of the uncertainty of the future consequences of the project that are as yet unknown. It does not entail artificially created and unnecessary game-theoretic uncertainties borne of competition. Being able to trade away an attributive stake is thus equivalent to making an arbitrary person accountable for your actions, since your attributive stake represents _what you did_ and isn't an arbitrary measure rooted in the notion of ownership, which, we contend, is a poorly founded notion in the majority of cases in general, and in the case of company ownership in particular (ABE proposes attributive stake as sufficient to model the imagined purpose of ownership in this case).

11. Global value vs local value. Projects are vehicles for channeling money, but the orientation is around maximizing global value rather than maximizing the value generated by any particular initiative. Thus if a desired valuable outcome can be achieved more efficiently by using project A than B, then the greatest incentive will always be to improve project A in order to achieve it. This is in contrast to traditional competitive markets where both A and B will be stretched to achieve the goal, and B may even prevail over A by virtue of incidental factors such as who is better funded and who gains a tactical advantage in relation to whatever rules of the game may happen to be in effect. Even independently of any moral ideal such as "may the best person win," (entailing the possibility that the best may not win -- indeed, the best may not even be playing the game!) and rationalizations such as "all's fair in love and war," this is a _wasteful_ outcome. Structuring markets like wars is not only unnecessary but not a good solution either. In ABE, both projects A and B in practice have access to the same materials, and both projects may attribute one another as sources of value, even if project A is ultimately the one being used. Indeed, this quality means that the system over time will likely favor small atomic contributions that are composed to create projects, so that the difference between a project A and a project B is likely to be very small as they may share the majority of components.
